So hi, my name is Harvey Lieberman and I'm here today to tell you a little bit about
the R in Pharma organisation, who we are, what we do and how you can get involved if
you're interested. So R is ubiquitous within the pharmaceutical industry, but until recently
there hasn't really been a group that works across multiple pharma companies to provide
a space for users to interact. So in 2017, a group of R users from several pharma companies
got together with other organisations interested in this space, such as the FDA and Harvard
to form a group and that's how R Pharma was born. R Pharma is an R consortium, ISC working
group. It's organised by a group of volunteers from multiple organisations and some of the
companies involved in setting up the R in Pharma conference are listed on this slide.
Now the goal of R Pharma has been to host a scientifically and industry oriented conference
focused on the use of R in the development of pharmaceuticals. Conference covers topics
such as genomics, drug discovery, PKPD, clinical trials, regulatory compliance and validation,
as well as more general topics such as reproducible research and DevOps. The focus is on the use
of R as a primary but not necessarily exclusive tool in the drug development process. We also
hold workshops at the conference, but since the primary focus is for R practitioners,
the workshops are really aimed at those who are already competent in R. Anyone's welcome
to present a workshop and we're lucky to have some really amazing presenters as you'll see
on some of the later slides. Now, there are plenty of data science conferences, workshops
and even organisations. So what makes us different? Well, for one, we're run by Pharma
for Pharma. We concentrate on R, which is not to say we don't have contributing talks
that include Python, SAS or even Julia, but just that R is the main focus. The R in Pharma
conference that we've held the past three years has been free. Any cost has been assumed
by an advisory group, which is generally made up of Pharma companies willing to support
the cross fertilisation that occurs when you put a bunch of curious programmers together.
In a similar vein, we have no sponsors and nor do we allow sponsorship at the conference
or any events because we believe that community led effort works best when there's no outside
influence. We're also focused on diversity and have goals on providing travel grants
to those who need assistance in attending the meetings. So why am I here today? Well,
I hope you'll understand that the RFOMA is a very open organisation made up of volunteers.
We'd welcome anyone wishing to get involved from presenting at a meeting to reaching out
to the community with a question and more on how you can get involved in 2021 a little
later. But first, I'd like to share some information on how we've evolved since 2018.
RFOMA holds a conference each year. The first was held in 2018 at Harvard. And if you're
unable to attend, many of the presentations are available on the RFOMA website. The links
on this slide and I invite you to peruse them. We had around 150 attendees, which was limited
by the size of the venue, and it ran over two days. We're lucky to have some really
amazing keynotes that are listed here. There are a number of amazing general presentations
that range from RNA sequencing to how to convert statisticians to data scientists to using
our energy XP environment. One thing that was clear from 2018 was that Shiny was the
main focus of most presenters work. In 2019, we repeated the conference, this time expanding
to longer workshops each half a day. Once again, the conference was held at Harvard,
with a mixture of keynotes and general presentations for around 150 attendees. I'd really like
to highlight the workshops here. We reached out to a number of workshop presenters, all
of whom agreed to put together a half day workshop at no cost. And all the workshop
materials and many of the presentations are available through the RFOMA website. What
was interesting in 2019, there was still a focus on Shiny, but there was a huge focus
on reproducibility. So, like many other groups in 2020, early on, we decided to switch to
a fully virtual conference. This provided few benefits over historical in-person meeting.
First, we could reach more attendees and we received over 500 registrations from 26 countries.
We were expecting around 300 and initially had prepared for up to 500. But as soon as
it opened, it was clear that we were going to hit 1,000 plus. And the graph on the right
is actually really interesting. It shows the registration. This was registration without
advertising. So, just through word of mouth, it's amazing how quickly we had registration.
Secondly, we could attract more presenters because people didn't have to travel. There
were more people willing to present. In fact, we had over 200 proposals for presentations.
Conference was held over three days, each four hours long, running in the morning for
those on the West Coast of the US and the evenings in Europe. So, I also want to highlight
the workshops that were held for the 2020 conference. Because of the virtual nature,
we could organize a little bit differently and stretched out over multiple days. We ran
a total of 11 workshops through the week before the conference, each three to four hours long.
There's some incredible presenters who put a lot of time and effort into building them.
And all the environments were pre-configured under RStudio Cloud. So, it was very easy
for people to come in, use the materials and access them afterwards. Once again, these
were all put on by the presenters at no charge. And once again, the conference is free anyway.
So, it was a really amazing piece of work. Our pharma meeting for 2021 is almost certainly
going to be a fully virtual event. And thinking about the trends we've seen over the past
three years, R is definitely growing within the pharma and biotech industries at quite
a rate. We now have more mature infrastructures in place, and there's definitely a move towards
more submissions using R. In addition, there's greater work in combining languages, such
as R and Python and R and SAS. I want to switch gears just a little bit and talk about something
new. We'll be launching a learning and development platform this year called LearnRinPharma.com.
And the goal of this is to help pharma professionals develop the skills needed in the drug development
space. The RINPharma group will be helping community members put on workshops, lectures,
teaching labs in cloud environments with the aim of building practical R skills in a friendly
environment. At a very high level, what we're hoping to do is to put together a monthly
write-up on a topic and then follow it by a lecture or workshop, even a workflow, maybe
a community discussion. This is one way that you, the pharma community, can contribute.
If you'd like to lead a discussion group, teach a lab, please get in touch with us.
Contact details will be on the final slide. And keep an eye out for LearnRinPharma.com.
We'll announce more through a Twitter feed and the RINPharma website.
The first RINPharma conference that we held three years ago was dominated by Shiny apps.
We can see how Shiny can play a role in modernizing the drug submission process, but it's fraught
with challenges. These can be related to technology, regulatory agencies, training
and validation, qualification, and even people and culture, plus others. In 2021, our pharma
wants to tackle Shiny for submissions as part of LearnRinPharma.com.
RINPharma is all about the community helping the community. This year, we're looking to
launch LearnRinPharma.com, which I spoke about. So if you have an idea for a write-up followed
by a lecture, workshop, discussion, please reach out through the website, email or Twitter.
We can help you find like-minded people, provide logistics. Some examples might be combining
R and Python or building a validation framework. Shiny for submissions will be part of this too.
Finally, a huge thank you to all of the presenters and workshop hosts over the past three years,
putting so much effort, along with the advisory groups and Harvard,
who have supported the conferences that we've held. And I thank you for your attention.
Thank you.